Once around a trio of glazers.
So I put this episode together based on
three very interesting members of the
Gaza catalog of nearby stars.
It adds to about a 30inut talk. So I
hope you enjoyed this with a bit of a
trot through the interesting features of
each of Gleer 12504
and 570.
Now, that's uh just three out of about
13,000 that there now are in the most
recent version of the catalog. But let's
take a look at them. So, first of all,
once around, Giza 12.
Now, Giza 12 is a cool red star in the
constellation of Pisces, the fish. You
can see just in the corner on the
boundary between Pisces and Pegasus on
the star map there. I've marked in a
little red ring where this little tiny
star is just about 40 light years from
us. All the gleers are within about 80
light years, maybe a little bit over
that in some cases as the catalog's been
extended. But this one, well, 40 light
years, that's pretty near the sun
really.
And it's a red dwarf. As as you might
imagine, a lot of stars are about 70% of
all known stars are red dwarfs. Just 24%
the mass of the sun. So about a quarter
and 26% of the radius.
Cool temperature just under 3,300
Kelvin. So glowing a sort of orangey red
color. We call these things red dwarfs,
but really to the eye, they're actually
more of an orange color when they're at
the upper end of the mass range for a
red dwarf. And 24% is getting on for one
of the heavier red dwarfs. The smallest
ones can be down under 10%.
So,
it's quite old. 7 billion years. The sun
is 4,500
million years old, 4.5 billion. And this
one is considerably older. And that's
good because red dwarf stars are a
little bit prone to having a lot of
flare activity on them when they are
young and they gradually settle down
with age.
So at 7 billion years, Gleer 12 has
begun to settle down. not producing the
same amount of X-rays and flares. And
that's good potentially for any
hospitable planets that might be in
orbit around it. And of course, that's
my primary interest here.
And indeed the test mission, the
transiting exoplanet survey was able to
discover GZA 12b,
the first planet to be found in orbit
around this little star. It's been
confirmed by two independent studies.
It's it's good to have independent
confirmation of these things. So often
we find that the initial discoveries can
be down to artifacts of the star.
Perhaps the the rotation of the star
carrying star spots around with it can
give a um impression that there might be
a transiting planet.
So GIA 12b orbits every 12.8 days.
That's quite quick. And it's just at 7%
of the Earth's sun distance. 0.0 07
astronomical units. Um, an astronomical
unit, the Earth's sun distance 150
million kilometers, 93 million miles.
So quite close in. But of course, this
star only 24% the mass of the sun and at
a cooler temperature and a smaller size
outputs less heat.
Now the amount of heat that is arriving
at Giza 12 is such that we are very very
interested in it. It's an Earthsized
Venused
planet. We're not exactly sure of the
measurements.
75 to 90% of the Earth's mass. 95% of
the radius though. So that's pretty much
the size of Venus. Venus is very very
slightly smaller than the Earth. And
at the upper end of the mass range there
in a slightly smaller volume, you end up
with a slightly higher density than that
of the Earth. So 7 g per cubic cm and
that makes it likely to be very Earth or
Venus like a rocky iron planet. Uh the
density of the Earth is about 5 1/2 g
per cubic cm. So perhaps the high end of
the mass range is overestimating that
density, but very very Earthlike indeed.
Now I said it be being closer in to a
cooler star
is a good thing in terms of keeping your
planet warm and in fact Giza 12b is
receiving more heat
than the Earth. It gets 1.6 six times as
much heat, which is going to raise its
temperature significantly,
less so than Venus. It's a gets a little
bit less heat than Venus does. And you
can calculate the baseline temperature
of the surface of a planet based simply
on the distance and the surface area and
temperature of the star. And we get a
figure of 42 centrade, 42 Celsius. So
quite hot. That's before any atmospheric
warming, any greenhouse effect. If we
calculate the same thing for the earth,
then we get a temperature that's well
below freezing, somewhere between
minus40 and minus 20 C. So the
greenhouse effect is raising the
temperature of the earth up from well
below freezing to the round about plus
20 that we have here. it would be
starting at 42 degrees and the
greenhouse effect would be making it
even hotter. So again, the similarities
with Venus actually seem to be perhaps
uh better than the similarities with
Earth in this case. It's likely to be a
very much a hot house planet
and because it's a transiting planet
discovered by TESS passing across the
line of sight to the star star we are
getting the James Web Space Telescope in
on the act and the plan is to try and
catch the light of the alien sunset.
When the planet passes in front of the
star, some of the light is blocked by
the body of the planet, but some of it
is filtered through any atmosphere
backlit against the star. And with the
James Webb Space Telescope, you can
observe the planet and the star
separately when they're not
uh having one cross in front of the
other in a transit. And you can watch
the transit and see how the spectrum of
the light changes. And from that if you
get enough data you can determine the
atmospheric composition of the
atmosphere of the planet looking for
different gases. uh that was very
famously done with Kepler 18b where they
found water and methane and carbon
dioxide but also a chemical called DMS
dimethile sulfide which seems on Earth
to only have biological origins. So
clearly we could do the same thing here
and this is absolutely on James Webb's
uh agenda to have a look at Gleer 12b
and see if we can see any signs of that
alien sunset light coming through the
atmosphere um and giving us the telltale
signs of what such an atmosphere might
be made of.
So that was it from Gleaser 12. more
news when we get it. Once James Webb has
done its thing, let's move on and we're
going to look at the next one which is
Giza 504.
So 504
dates back to being cataloged by famous
astronomer Taiko Brahe in 1598.
It's in his published list of a thousand
stars and you can see it marked with a
little ring on the star map there in the
constellation of Virgo. And in fact, in
other star cataloges, it gets the
designation 59 vaginis as uh one of the
lesser stars in the constellation of
Virgo. You can see it with the unaded
eye. It's considerably brighter than
Giza 12.
So 57 light years away again
relatively near the sun and magnitude
5.2. So under good conditions you'll be
able to find it northeast of the
brightest star in Virgo Spiker. So
relatively easy to track that one down
if you're interested. Looking at it with
binoculars or a small telescope would
probably be best. So what's interesting
about KZA 504 then? Well, it's very
similar to the sun. This is a a solar
analog.
16% more massive and 12% greater in
diameter than the sun and a little
hotter, 6,200 Kelvin. The sun is about
5,800. So, it's another 400.
But that larger diameter and the
slightly higher temperature results in
the total energy output over the surface
of the star being double that of our
sun.
And
with only 16% more mass and double the
power output, you can see it's going to
have a rather shorter life expectancy
than Saul. a sun soul will live 10
billion years and is about halfway
through. This one is going to burn
through its fuel that much faster at
almost double the rate and therefore um
live just over half as long before it
runs out of fuel in its core.
What's tricky though is we don't really
know how old it is. The age estimates
range from 160 million years to 4.5
billion. 4.5 billion would be the same
age as the sun. And that's very
interesting because the nearby sunlike
star of an equivalent age might have
been born in the same cluster as the
sun. Um, and we're very interested in
that from the point of view of the
possibility of the seeds of life being
spread around the entire cluster, not
just our solar system.
So, a bit of a tricky one and it would
be nice to be able to work out how old
this is.
It spins in just 3.2 days, which is much
faster than the sun. And it takes a
month to go around about 25 26 days for
the sun to rotate fully.
And that rapid rotation suggests that
it's got a very young age. What happens
to stars is that as the material falls
inwards to create the stars, it's like a
skater pulling their arms in when they
go into a spin on an ice rink. They spin
up to a high rate of rotation.
But then as the star ignites and starts
streaming
stellar wind away from itself, lots of
charged particles being hurled out into
space, those charged uh winds carry away
the angular momentum of the rotation of
the star. And so as they age, they slow
down. And so when you see one rotating
as fast as this, one of the implications
is that it's probably on the young side.
Uh there are other ways of dating it,
looking at the spectra and looking to
see what uh the elemental and isotope
composition of the star is. See how long
it's been burning, how much it's
enriched its own surface and so forth.
But with these sunlike stars, it's a
little difficult because they don't
fully stir themselves.
So the changes, the extra helium that
they've made tends to still be in the
core, not mixed into the surface layer.
So you can't really tell. All you have
to go on is the initial loadout of
elements which points back roughly to
the epoch in the universe when they were
formed when they picked up the signature
that gradually gets dirtier and dirtier
as more generations of stars seed the
universe with heavier elements. So we
can see that initial load out and that
is suggestive that it might be 4.5
billion years old. But those two things
don't seem to fit.
Now, I said it was similar to the sun.
And another aspect in which that's true
is that we have an 11-year sunspot cycle
caused by the magnetic field of the sun
getting twisted as the star rotates. And
this one is showing a magnetic cycle of
12 years. Very, very similar indeed. And
that's very interesting because ours is
caused as the sun rotates. It's not a
solid object. The equatorial regions
rotate faster than the poles. And so
that gradually twists the magnetic field
like winding up a main spring. And after
11 years, the uh main spring can't take
it anymore. and it snaps back and the
field reverses and it goes through and
starts all over again. And so if Giza
504 has a 12-year magnetic cycle, you
would expect that it's being driven in
the same way by the same rotation.
And that points to 3.2 days not being
the right rotation speed, which might
mean that it's much older. So there are
quite a few factors to be taken into
account in trying to pin down exactly
what's going on.
And of course we're interested in
exoplanets orbiting around these Giza
stars, these nearby stars. And 504 is no
exception. There is Giza 504b
discovered by the Subaru 8.2 meter
telescope in 2013. We have a direct
imaging of this planet and that's
fascinating. It's shown on the right
here. You can see the location of the
star in the center that's been masked
out and a lot of stray noise that's
defracted around the obscuring disc of
the coronagraph that was blotting out
the starlight. And then up towards the
top right, GIA 504b shows up quite
cleanly. And the dotted line, that's 30
astronomical units, the size of
Neptune's orbit. So this is quite a
distant orbit really relative to the
star, although the star is a little bit
hotter and more powerful than the sun.
So what do we know about GIA 504b? Well,
having imaged it, we can see the color
and it's a strange dark magenta purple
colored world, not like any of the
planets that we have in our solar
system. So, that's intriguing right from
the get-go.
Orbiting around at 80 astronomical
units, more than double the distance of
uh Neptune, and taking 550 days. So,
that's quite a wide orbit, taking a long
time to go around. Now the main estimate
of the mass is that this is four times
the mass of Jupiter. So a a super
Jupiter gas giant planet perhaps. But
some estimates and the there are quite a
number of different estimates of this
are putting that figure all the way up
as far as 30 Jupiter masses. Now, 30
Jupiter masses takes you out of the gas
giant
mass range and well into the brown dwarf
range. Anything more than 13 Jupiter
masses is essentially classed as a brown
dwarf, a uh not quite star that can heat
itself by a limited amount of nuclear
fusion of things like dutyium and
lithium inside itself.
um not hot enough to become a red dwarf
star and start the proton proton chain
of making hydrogen into helium. So some
uncertainty about this even though we
can see it and of course if we can see
it we can measure the brightness and um
with the brightness and the temperature
then we can start to learn more things
about um the energy release and how old
it is and it would be fantastic to know
more about this one. So lot more to
study on Gleaser 504B.
So that's it for the interest in 504.
Let's move on again to the third of our
trio and that is this one, Giza 570.
So what's cool about GZA 570?
Well, it's a another faint nearby star.
It's designated 33G Libra and uh it's in
the southwest con of that constellation
between alpha and sigma. I've marked it
with the little red circle there on the
map in the constellation of Libra near
to the ecliptic and quite a number of
these stars that we're looking at are
actually fairly near the ecliptic plane
the plane of the solar system.
We've measured the distance and of
course the first measurements were made
with HPACOS the parallax measuring
satellite um and it stood for high
precision parallax collecting satellite
um making Hipparos
um in tribute to Hipparos of Nicicoia
the ancient Greek astronomer who uh did
a lot of work in figuring things out all
those years ago.
But Hipparos routinely got things a bit
wrong. And the initial figure was 24.5
light years um for Glea 570. And that's
a bit high because subsequent
measurements with things like GIA and
some of the more recent parallax
measurements have given us figures of
19.2. So just under 20 light years away.
What do we know about it? Well, this is
a little bit smaller than the sun. It's
a K type orange dwarf, 82% the mass of
soul, 71% the radius, and a bit cooler,
4,500 Kelvin compared to 5,800
for um our sun.
And with that lower temperature and the
smaller radius, we get just 15% of the
total power output in terms of visible
light. So relatively faint. Um, and you
have to watch out for the luminosity
figures as to whether with these stars
we're talking about visible light or the
total power output including all the
infrared light of which there is often
much. Um and uh that needs to be
accounted for correctly when doing the
sums.
But we find that this one has some
friends. It has a pair of red dwarfs in
orbit around that primary star.
They orbit at 190 astronomical units
taking 2,100 years. And this marvelous
photograph shows the KT type orange
dwarf primary with the pair of red
dwarfs there lower down in the image. Um
quite a striking site that we've got
this image and it's because of that
relatively wide separation. But you can
clearly see the separation between the
two red dwarfs, the B and the C stars. B
is actually about half the mass of our
sun. Putting it at the top end uh the M1
class of the uh red dwarfs. An M0 would
be the highest most massive type of red
dwarf. So M1 is very near the top with a
temperature of 3 a half th00and Kelvin.
But these things are pretty faint. 1.9%
the power output.
Looking at the sea star, it's even
smaller. 38% class M3, a little bit
cooler by couple of hundred degrees and
just 0.3% of the luminosity. They're
quite faint, but an interesting little
trio of a near sunlike ktype dwarf,
which we're very interested in, the
primary star, because these K-type
dwarfs um are fairly sunlike, fairly
stable, live a long time, and could
easily have families of planets. And a
couple of even longerlived red dwarfs in
orbit around it.
Now, I've talked several times about the
Stefan Boltzman equation, and that
enables us to work with the temperature,
the luminosity,
and the surface area of the emitting
star.
So, 4 pi r 2 is the surface area of a
sphere. L is the luminosity, and T is
the temperature. And you can use this
constant sigma the Stefan Boltzman
constant which uh is just a fixed number
to make the comparison and the
conversion. And if you take the uh L
divide by the surface area times
Boltzman's const by the Stefan Boltzman
constant and then that will give you the
fourth power of the temperature in
Kelvin. So if we take the fourth root as
shown there, you can just extract the
temperature if you know the luminosity
and the size.
On the other hand, after a bit of
algebra, you can uh rearrange that and
if you know the temperature T and you
know Boltzman's constant or Stefan
Boltzman constant as I should correctly
call it and you know the total
luminosity L, then you can find out the
size. And this has been a question that
people have asked me several times. How
can we know the size of such an object
just by looking at it? Well, from the
spectrum, we can see where the peak in
the black body radiation curve is. That
tells us the temperature. So, we get T.
We know sigma and we can measure the
total amount of energy coming out. L the
luminosity. And from that, we simply
plug the numbers in and get the value
for the radius. And I've done that for
the B and C stars here. So we know the
temperature of B is 3530
and for C it's 3304 in Kelvin the sun
5772.
So taking a ratio between that and the
sun and using the appropriate conversion
factor of the Stefan Boltzman constant
we find that the radius of the B star
you plug the numbers in you get uh 0.615
615 times the radius of the sun. So 61
a.5% of the radius and you get 399. So
essentially 40% of the radius for the
sea star. Now that's exactly how we go
about doing that. And so now if we have
the total power output and the radius,
we can make a pretty good guess as to
how come that amount of energy is being
generated in such a small space using
our models and make guesses about things
like the mass.
In the case of uh the uh pleaser 570, of
course, we can also look at the way that
the objects are orbiting each other and
use Kepler's laws to try and untangle
the mass from that direction as well.
But we've got a fourth companion in this
interesting system, and that is Giza
570D,
which is a brown dwarf. And you've got
it marked in the picture on the right
there with a little arrow at the bottom
right. It's 1,500 astronomical units
away orbiting round at quite a
considerable distance beyond the uh main
trio.
And we can use Kepler's laws and try and
figure out the masses of the things that
are being orbited. We can't use that to
get its own mass. You always get the
mass of the thing in the middle. When
you find something orbiting around it
based on the distance and the period,
you can work out the mass of the
controlling uh central object. But you
can't get the mass of the planet or in
this case the brown dwarf. For that we
have to use the temperature and the
brightness and make estimates based on
the Stefan Boltzman equation and the
models of how these things work that
we've inferred over many years. And this
tells us that we have a 35 mass object
of Jupiter object. So that puts it as a
brown dwarf and with a temperature of uh
over 780 Kelvin 786K there and this puts
it in the T7
class of brown dwarfs. So a middle
ranking temperature range for brown
dwarfs. They can be class L, class T or
class Y with T in the middle for the
medium temperature ones.
So an interesting system in itself and
the speculation and it is speculation at
this stage is that maybe that brown
dwarf orbiting around so far from the
main orange star and its two red dwarf
companions
could have its own planets or a moon.
We're not sure whether a brown dwarf
would have a planet orbiting it or a
moon orbiting it. And we're in danger of
falling into the whole debate of what we
mean by a planet and the the whole story
about Pluto if we go down that rabbit
hole. But let's call it a moon for now.
If a moon was orbiting round the the
brown dwarf D, then the heat 768 Kelvin
radiating away from that brown dwarf
might be able to render the
um planetary sized moon habitable and
that would be very very interesting. So,
one of the projects that is ongoing is
to see if we can observe any transits of
such an object going around the brown
dwarf blocking out some of the heat
radiation. And it'd be fascinating to
start to discover these small um exom
moons of nonstellar objects. That would
be uh a really interesting path to go
down. And so there are lots to look at
in this system.
We've also had speculation that the main
star a the ktype orange dwarf might
itself host planets. And in 1998 there
was a planet suggested but no one's been
able to follow that up. And it seems to
have been one of these false detections
that I mentioned earlier. um an artifact
of behavior of the stars themselves
rather than actually something induced
by a planet. So we currently have no
confirmed planets in this system, but we
have several possibilities. So again,
this is going to be an area to really
follow up on as we go further forward.
So that's it. Thanks very much for
listening to my trio of glazes and to
some of the questions that uh our
discoveries pose. One of the things I
love about astronomy is we keep finding
new questions every time we answer the
previous generation. We find new things
that we want to know. And so, thanks
very much for listening and I hope
you've enjoyed that one. Bye for now.